---
layout: post
title: "What is Computer Science?"
---

If you google for "What is Computer Science?", you will probably find out
several posts describing Computer Science (CS) in terms of computers and
programs.  However it is not entirely true. In fact, CS is a bad name for this
knowledge area, since it put so much attention on computers and let other
important concepts aside. [Edsger
Dijsktra](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Edsger_W._Dijkstra) once saids
"Computers are for CS as telescopes are for astronomy". In this text I will
define CS a more meaningful way than using computers and computation.

# History

Computer science was born when the humans being figured out they needed some way
to do repeated computations of something easily and fast. In 2700~2300 BCE the
Sumerian came up with the abacus, which is an object to speed up how they did
math calculations.  The Sumerian abacus is a pretty obvious _computation
device_, right? However, what would you say about the [mechanical
loom](https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/the-mechanical-loom/)?- If you
have no idea what it is, check this
[video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=K6NgMNvK52A) out.

Created in 18th-century by Jean-Charles Jacquard, the mechanical loom is a
machine where its operator uses several punched cards to control the cumbersome
mechanism to interleave the strings into clothes. The punched cards tell to the
machine how and which strings should be interleaved to create patterns onto the
fabric. So, we also have some kind of computation here, as this [adorable
grandma](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MQzpLLhN0fY) confirms it to us. The
repeated process of interleaving the strings is automatized through the _program
written_ in the punched card language. And this my friends, is the essence of
computing.

> Computers are machines guided by programs to do some task.

Another example of unconventional computer is a simple mechanical clock. Yes,
any analogical clock or watch is also a computer.

Using the definition before, let's demonstrate that a clock is a computer as
well.  As we have learned with the mechanical loom, a computer should automatize
something, and this automation should be achieve through a program. Hence, which
is the automation and what is the program into a clock?

The first is easy, a clock computes how time pass. Before the clocks, the people
should look to the sky and measure the position of the stars to know what time
it was. Remember, the Sun is also a star ;-) So, they figured out that the stars
move over the sky and this movement could be measured. Doing this repeatedly,
someone has started to understand and measure the time. Ok, but how this history
fits with our definition? After centuries of observation, Christiaan Huygens
invented the first mechanical clock. Based on gears rotations and spiral
springs, Huygens mapped the stars motion into pointers rotations, quite neat!
Well, it wasn't a directly mapping. He used the rotation physics to calculates
how long for a gear to do a revolution, and using some
[mathmagic](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=U_ZHsk0-eF0) it could model seconds
to years using gears. However, using stars is more poetic, so lets pretend that
was from stars to gears. Hence, the Huygens' clock can measure mechanically and
repeatedly how the time goes.

Now we have answered what is the clock's computation, we have to answer: how it
can be programmed. To be a computer, the device must be programmed, and by
programming I mean, pass a list of instructions so the device (computer) can
repeat indefinitely [or not](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Halting_problem).
Whit this new statement our abacus from the beginning of this section doesn't
seem a computer anymore. In fact it isn't, it is a calculator. On the other hand
the mechanical loom is much like a computer as we know today than an abacus. How
would image it?  Back to our clock, the clock programming happens through the
gears and springs.  The number of gears of different sizes, and how they are
combined with springs give to the clock a behavior - measuring time. A clock
master can make clocks to measure from seconds to years just playing around
different gears combinations.

As we can see, none of these examples are _computers_ as we know, but they do
computations and there are Computer Science on these stuff.

What are the common point here that links these devices, computers, and computer
science?! The answer is _abstraction_!

# Abstraction: the art of hidden unnecessary stuff.

[Abstraction](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abstraction) is the process of take
out all unnecessary details from something, so that you can analyze only the
relevant stuff from a given situation. Or in simple words, abstraction is when
you ask for a glass of water and it doesn't matter how it is the glass you are
going to be served with.

Another classical example about abstraction is a house's blueprint, or any other
blueprint. That sheet with some lines and number represents a house, it has all
useful information need to build a house up, but there is no details about what
is the color for painting a wall. The devil lives on details, and for
understanding something you not really need go deep into the details. Removing
all unnecessary details makes much more easier to understand the core of the
problem you are aiming to solve. And once you have a reduced scope for a problem
is much easier you come up with a solution.

In CS all disciplines are about studying abstractions for solving problems. In
programing you learn how abstract problems in languages terms, in systems (OS,
networks, distributed systems, etc.) you learn how abstract problems in
building-blocks. Software engineering, abstraction about governance  of software
problems, and so on.

Going back to our examples, the mechanical loom is a tool that executes
instructions to solve a problem, draw patterns in fabrics. What are the
abstraction there? To answer it we have to deep understand the problem we are
aiming to solve with a mechanical loom.

## The problem

The _raison d'etre_ of a mechanical loom is transform holes in a punch card into
movements to weave strings and create fabrics or a draw a pattern in a fabric.
Doing this analysis, what is problem and which is the reasonable abstraction
resolve this problem is a simpler way?

There are infinite ways to weave strings. 

abstraction and language

A little of context...
how computer science arose?

# Abstractions and Models

CS inherits from Math the concept of abstraction. Everyone abstraction on
day-by-day, a simple example are letters and numbers.

*Abstraction Science* is a better name and would avoid
that people make wrong assumptions about this subject.

# Computer Science vs Computer Enginering
